UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPEALABILITY FROM THE DENIAL OF MOTION FOR SECTION 2255 RELIEF

COMES NOW the Defendant/Petitioner, Karl Hungus, by and through Federal Defender Rich Curtner, and hereby moves this court to issue a certificate of appealability from the denial of Mr. Hungus’ amended motion to vacate, set aside or correct his sentence pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2255.

I. BACKGROUND

Mr. Hungus seeks to withdraw his December 1, 2014 guilty plea and sentence of 262 months’ imprisonment for conspiracy to distribute controlled substances. 21 U.S.C. §§ 846, 841(a)(1) and (b)(1)(B). Mr. Hungus attempted to plead guilty on August 13, 2014 under the terms of a more favorable Rule 11(c)(1)(C) plea agreement which had a sentencing range of 150-240 months’ imprisonment. D.C. Doc. 39. However, the prosecution breached the agreement by filing an inflammatory sentencing memo graphically detailing the worst aspects of Mr. Hungus’ criminal history and tacitly inviting the court to reject the parties’ agreement. D.C. Doc. 79 at 9 (urging court to be “extremely suspicious” of any proffered apology by Mr. Hungus because he “had spent his adult life committing crimes and hurting women.”). Although the parties’ agreement called for a below-Guidelines sentence, the PSR was also modified at the prosecutor’s insistence to recommend an upward departure. Unsurprisingly, based on the prosecution’s actions, the district court judge was led to reject the sentencing agreement as insufficiently punitive. The court quoted from the prosecutor’s sentencing memorandum as grounds for his decision. D.C. Doc. 143.

The Government’s actions clearly violated the original sentencing agreement and Mr. Hungus’ due process rights. See United States v. Heredia, 768 F.3d 1220, 1237 (9th Cir. 2014) (breach occurs where prosecution files sentencing memorandum “winking at the district court” to impose harsher sentence). However, Mr.  Hungus’ counsel  Rex  Butler  did not  identify  the breach and failed to seek specific performance of the original agreement.

Butler’s  deficient  performance  at  sentencing  was  compounded  by his ignorance of the legal defenses available to his client. Mr. Hungus was alleged to have provided heroin to a woman whose death was determined to have been caused by multi-drug intoxication. During the second round of plea negotiations, the prosecutor threatened to seek a penalty enhancement for distribution of controlled substances resulting in death, 21 U.S.C. § 841(b)(1)(B), which carries a mandatory minimum sentence of life in prison. Butler incompetently failed to appreciate that Hungus would have had viable defenses to the “death results” enhancement had the matter gone to trial. See Burrage v. United States, 134 S. Ct. 881, 892 (2014) (holding that when a controlled substance is not an independently sufficient cause of the victim’s death or serious bodily injury, a defendant cannot be liable under the penalty enhancement provision of 21 U.S.C. § 841(b)(1)(C) unless such use is a but-for cause of the death or injury.”).Despite thee and other omissions, the district court judge assigned to Mr. Hungus’ Section 2255 motion, Hon. John K. Singleton, denied relief. The court’s reasons were both procedural and substantive. After the parties submitted briefing on the merits of Mr. Hungus’ motion, Judge Singleton asked for briefing on whether Mr. Hungus’ amended motion was timely. Although the initial pro se motion complied with the period of limitations under AEDPA, Mr. Hungus’ amended petition was lodged after the period of limitations had run and thus was only timely if it “related back” to the original filing. Fed. R. Civ. Pro. 15(c)(2). Judge Singleton	reasoned	that	Hungus’	Sixth	Amendment	claim	regarding	the prosecution’s breach was not available for review because that claim did not “relate back” to the claims presented in the initial pro se Section 2255 motion. See Mayle v. Felix, 545 U.S. 664, 658 (2005) (holding that relation back in habeas cases depends on the existence of a common “core of operative facts” uniting the original and newly asserted claims, and which are not separate in both “time and type” from the originally pleading). Hungus’ pro se motion had referenced the circumstances surrounding the first plea agreement, and asserted that Butler had been ineffective in failing to prepare for trial, but the pro se motion had not specifically complained about the prosecution’s breach of the first agreement. Because of this, Judge Singleton reasoned that the claims in the amended motion were not connected by the same core of operative facts. D.C. Doc. 200 at 6.

Judge Singleton also denied Mr. Hungus’ Section 2255 motion on the merits, although his discussion of the prosecutor’s breach is conclusory. The order does not discuss why the prosecutor’s unflattering description of Mr. Hungus’ criminal history in her sentencing memorandum and her objections to the presentence report do not constitute a material breach of the parties’ agreement. 

As to the claims presented in Mr. William’s pro se motion, Judge Singleton noted that Butler had cited the Burrage case in his second sentencing memorandum. However, the court did not make findings as to whether Butler had been aware of this case law during plea negotiations, or whether Mr. Hungus had been competently advised of his legal defenses before entering his plea. The court declined to issue a certificate of appealability. 

Mr. Hungus now moves this Court for a certificate of appealability from the district court’s decision. 

II. QUESTIONS FOR CERTIFICATION

Mr. Hungus asks that the court grant a certificate of appealability on the following questions: 

Does Mr. William’s amended Section 2255 motion “relate back” to the original pro se motion? 

Is Mr. Hungus is entitled to withdraw his plea based on ineffective assistance of counsel regarding the prosecution’s breach of the first plea agreement? 

May Mr. Hungus withdraw his plea based on counsel’s ineffective assistance in failing to advise Mr. Hungus of the defenses available under Burrage v. United States, 571 U.S. 204 (2014)? 

III. GROUNDS FOR GRANTING THE APPLICATION

In Slack v. McDaniel, the Supreme Court held that “when the district court denies a habeas petition on procedural grounds without reaching the prisoner’s underlying constitutional claim, a COA should issue (and an appeal of the district court’s order may be taken) if the prisoner shows, at least, that jurists of reason would find it debatable whether the petition states a valid claim of the denial of a constitutional right, and that jurists of reason would find it debatable whether the district court was correct in its procedural ruling.” 529 U.S. at 484.

Mr. Hungus is entitled to a certificate of appealability because jurists of reason would disagree with both the district court’s procedural ruling as well as the court’s ruling on the merits.

A. The district court’s order unfairly bifurcates the claims presented in the first and second motions, and misapplies Mayle v. Felix

In Mayle v. Felix, the Supreme Court held that an amended habeas petition will not relate back to the original filing “when it asserts a new ground for relief supported by facts that differ in both time and type from those [set forth in] the original pleading.” Mayle, 545 U.S. at 650.

Judge Singleton’s application of the Mayle factors reflects an improper emphasis on the differences between the legal theories identified in the pro se motion

and the amended motion. D.C. Doc. 200 at 6 (“The claims are … based on separate theories of counsel’s alleged shortcomings). However, the “time and type” language

in Mayle refers to the facts that support the grounds for relief as opposed to the claims or grounds for relief. Nguyen v. Curry, 736 F.3d 1287, 1297 (9th Cir. 2013).

In his pro se motion, Mr. Hungus argued that his plea was involuntary and imposed in violation of his right to effective assistance of counsel under the Sixth Amendment. He complained that his attorney Rex Butler had incompetently failed to prepare for trial, and that Butler had failed to advise him of his defenses under Burrage. In his amended motion, Mr. Hungus called attention to the prosecution’s

breach of the first plea agreement, and renewed his claim that Butler had been ineffective by failing to prepare for trial or apprehend Mr. Hungus’ defenses. The fact that Mr. Hungus’ amended motion focused on counsel’s incompetent failure to object to the prosecution’s breach does not render the amended motion untimely. It is well settled that an otherwise untimely amendment to a post-conviction relief motion may “clarify or amplify” the facts that relate to the underlying claim without violating the relation back doctrine. Felix v. Mayle, 379 F.3d 612, 621 (9th Cir.

2004) (Tallman, J. dissenting). Mr. Hungus’ pro se motion referred to the initial plea agreement and its rejection by the district court. In addition, the substance of the claims, the nature of the right being violated, and the factual prerequisite necessary for the adjudication of the claims are similar if not identical.

The district court unfairly bifurcated Mr. Hungus’ claims into two separate events – counsel’s performance during the first plea and counsel’s performance

during the second plea. Judge Singleton’s order seems to conclude that the facts surrounding the first plea would have been irrelevant to determining whether counsel was ineffective in advising Mr. Hungus to accept the second plea agreement.

But as with any Strickland claim, the circumstances surrounding the district court’s rejection of the first Rule 11(c)(1)(C) agreement – and in particular, counsel’s inept handling of the prosecution’s breach – would have been essential to proving the claims presented in Mr. Hungus’ pro se motion. See, e.g., Washington v. Smith, 219 F.3d 620, 635 (7th Cir. 2000) (“Engle did not just botch up one witness or one argument or one issue – he repeatedly demonstrated a lack of diligence required for a vigorous defense.”).

In essence, Mr. Hungus pro se motion argued that Butler had abandoned his client by failing to prepare for trial or conduct research into legal defenses. As a result, Mr. Hungus argued, Mr. Hungus was misled about his defenses and the prosecution was allowed to dictate the terms of the resulting plea and sentence. However, in order to show that his plea was involuntary, Mr. Hungus would have had to explain why he had nonetheless attempted to change his plea once before. The Government would have undoubtedly relied on the first plea as proof that Mr. Hungus was not interested in proceeding to trial. Thus, in order to show that his attorney’s deficient performance had resulted in prejudice, Mr. Hungus would have had to explain not only why he was unsatisfied with the terms of the second plea agreement, but why he felt comfortable accepting the terms of the first plea agreement, or otherwise explain why his decision to accept the first plea agreement was a product of his attorney’s ineffective assistance. Because the first and second plea are factually conjoined, both the pro se motion and the amended motion “arise from” the same core operative facts – counsel’s performance during the pretrial negotiations and sentencing process. Contrary to Judge Singleton’s decision, this does not require adopting an “expansive definition” of what constitutes the same “conduct, transaction or occurrence” for purposes of Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 15(c)(2) of the sort found to be invalid in Mayle.

Nor did the district court identify any analogous authority holding that a post- conviction applicant seeking relief premised on one aspect of counsel’s deficient performance during pretrial negotiations is precluded from also relying on earlier acts or omissions by counsel regarding the same type of deficient performance. To conclude that the claims in the first and second motion do not “arise from” the same events, the district court failed to heed Civil Rule 15(c)(2)’s command that untimely amendments “relate back” so long as they arise same the same conduct, transaction or occurrence. Because reasonable jurists would agree that Mr. Hungus made that showing, a certificate of appealability on the district court’s procedural ruling should issue.

B. Mr. Hungus has made a substantial showing of a denial of his Sixth Amendment right to counsel based on trial counsel’s failure to object to the prosecution’s breach of the initial sentencing agreement

In its discussion of the merits of Mr. Hungus’ amended motion, the district court devoted roughly a paragraph to explaining why the prosecution had not materially breached the first plea agreement. D.C. Doc. 199 at 8. The order does not recite the facts in detail, and summarily concludes that the prosecution did not breach the plea agreement because the “prosecution’s actions were offered [sic] in response to Hungus’ argument advocating for a 180-month sentence,” which fell within the parties’ sentencing range. D.C. Doc. 199 at 8.

The district court’s conclusions are not supported by the record. The first plea agreement expressly agreed that a sentencing range of 150-240 months was reasonable and appropriate in light of Mr. Hungus’ offense conduct. ECF Dkt. 39 at 13. Both the defense and the Government agreed that this sentencing range was appropriate because it “reflected the sentencing criteria that the court would otherwise be required to follow if Mr. Hungus had gone to trial and been convicted on all counts.” D.C. Doc. 39 at 18.

Not only did the Government request that the presentence report recommend an upward departure, the Government’s sentencing memorandum urged the court to impose a harsher sentence. Despite Mr. Hungus’ acceptance of responsibility, the memorandum claimed, without support, that Mr. Hungus was “callous” and “unmoved” by the victim’s death. Id.

To underscore the Government’s belief that Mr. Hungus’ prospects for rehabilitation were poor, the memorandum quoted from the charging documents filed in Mr. Hungus’ 1988 kidnapping prosecution, even though those facts were discussed at length in the presentence report. The memorandum concluded by cautioning that the court should be “extremely suspicious” of any proffered apology by Mr. Hungus because he “has spent his adult life committing crimes and hurting women.” Id. at 9. The memorandum did not refer to any mitigating factors or otherwise attempt to justify a low-Guidelines sentence.

This Court held in United States v. Whitney, 673 F.3d 965, 971 (9th Cir. 2012) that when parties specify that they will jointly recommend a defendant be sentenced within an agreed-upon advisory Guidelines range, the Government breaches that plea agreement when it makes “repeated and inflammatory references” to the defendant’s criminal history, that serve no purpose other than to encourage the district court to sentence him above the implicitly-recommended range. Id. (quoting United States v. Johnson, 187 F.3d 1129, 1135 (9th Cir. 1999)).

As in Whitney, the prosecutor’s inflammatory sentencing memo served “no purpose” but to argue for a punishment harsher than what the Government had agreed to recommend. It is beyond question that Mr. Hungus’ attorney Rex Butler had a professional duty to object to the Government’s breach of the plea agreement and seek specific performance. Despite being presented with multiple opportunities to do so, counsel never raised a single objection and therefore conceded the Government’s spurious characterization of Mr. Hungus as a remorseless career criminal. Simply put, no conceivable tactical or strategic reason could explain counsel’s failure to raise the plea-breach issue.

Consequently, Mr. Hungus has made a substantial showing of a violation of his Sixth Amendment and due process rights. Because reasonable jurists would disagree with the district court’s contrary conclusion, a certificate of appealability on this issue should be granted.

C. Mr. Hungus has made a substantial showing that he was denied effective assistance of counsel by his attorney’s ignorance of defenses that could have been raised at trial

As to the claims presented in Mr. Hungus’ pro se motion, Judge Singleton noted that Butler had referred to the Burrage decision in his sentencing memorandum. However, this is not sufficient to disprove Mr. Williams’ allegation that he had been misinformed of his legal defenses before the second change of plea hearing. As Mr. Williams argued in his amended motion, by the time counsel became aware of Burrage, it was “too little, too late.” Judge Singleton’s order makes no mention of this contention.

The order goes on to suggest that Mr. Hungus was required to prove that no reasonable juror would have convicted him based on Burrage in order to establish deficient performance. D.C. Doc. 200 at 10 (“The evidence does not demonstrate that no reasonable juror could have found that the heroin was a but-for cause of S.C.’s death, and thus Hungus does not demonstrate that counsel’s advice to accept the amended plea agreement was deficient in light of Burrage.”). The district court’s conclusions on this point are incorrect, as Mr. Hungus did not bear the burden of showing that he would have been successful at trial. Rather, he was required to establish a reasonable probability that, absent his attorney’s deficient performance, he would have insisted on going to trial. Hill v. Lockhart, 474 U.S. 52, 60 (1985).

Because reasonable jurists would disagree with the district court’s reasoning, Mr. Hungus has made a substantial showing of the denial of his Sixth Amendment right to counsel. Accordingly, a certificate of appealability should issue.

IV. CONCLUSION

Mr. Hungus has established that the prosecution breached its obligations under the original plea agreement. He has additionally shown that his attorney rendered ineffective assistance by failing to object. Accordingly, this court should

issue a certificate of appealability to permit Mr. Hungus to appeal from the district court’s order denying his Section 2255 motion.

DATED this 26th day of September, 2018.

Respectfully

submitted, /s/ Bob Ross	