The government’s case against Mr. Smith and the resulting judgment rest entirely on the use of unconstitutionally obtained evidence.
Based on a suspicion of fraud committed by a certain Iuliia Zhadko and his company, Timeline Transport, in a PPP loan application, the government’s sights turned to Mr. Smith because Zhadko was one of several friends and associates who transferred money to help make a down-payment on Mr. Smith’s home. Based on Mr. Smith’s decade-old record involving a non-jail plea, the government assumed that he too must be culpable; however, the government had zero direct evidence that Mr. Smith was involved in Zhadko’s allegedly fraudulent application.
In an effort to fill this critical gap in its investigation, the government began a pattern of misconduct that plagued the case from the beginning till the end. The government unlawfully stopped, interrogated, and searched Mr. Smith based on a pretextual invocation of the border search authority and “National Security.” See Dkt. 130, 135, 136. As case agent Justin Palmerton testified at the Miami bail hearing, “once the CBP stopped for the secondary inspection, we learned that there was a photograph of Iuliia Zhadko on the digital device and we made the connection that Iuliia Zhadko was, in fact, an alias of Richard Smith.” Oct. 22, 2020 Hr’g Tr. at 23-24, United States v. Smith, 20-mj-3857, Dkt. 17 (S.D. Fla. Oct. 22, 2020) (“Oct. 22 Tr.”).
The tainted evidence from the October 19, 2020 Miami airport stop became the lynchpin of the government’s case against Mr. Smith. In effect, the fruit of the pretextual Miami airport customs inspection ultimately found its way into government trial exhibit ​​GEX 10, which contained text messages in which Mr. Smith and co-defendant Tamara Dadyan allegedly discussed the conspiracy. Without that tainted evidence, the government would not have been able to obtain the evidence seized at the Weddington Street residence in Encino, California, the residence of Tamara Dadyan and Artur Smith, two of Defendants’ accused co-conspirators Weddington home, including Dadyan’s phone, which contained the text messages. The Government used Mr. Smith’s tainted phone information to obtain the search warrants on the Weddington residence.
In March 2021, Defendants moved to suppress all of the evidence from the Miami airport on the basis that the Fourth Amendment prohibited the warrantless detention and searches the government conducted by deputizing Customs and Border Protection (CBP) officials to the investigation of suspected PPP loan fraud. See Dkt. 130, Motion to Suppress Evidence From Pretextual Detention and Warrantless Searches. Defendants also moved to suppress all of the evidence from the Miami airport on the basis that the search of Defendants’ luggage and phones violated the Fifth and Sixth Amendments. See Dkt. 135, Motion to Suppress Evidence Collected in Violation of the Fifth and Sixth Amendments.
On April 27, 2021, the Court granted in part Mr. Smith’s Motion to Suppress Evidence Collected in Violation of the Fifth and Sixth Amendments the motion in part. As to the Fifth Amendment argument, the Court found a Miranda violation and suppressed the evidence from Defendants’ phones. See Dkt. 296.
Notably, the Court found that Defendants’ disclosure of their phone passcodes was not voluntary. Dkt. 296 at 17. The Court found several factors compelled this result. Defendants were in custody without being given Miranda warnings. Defendants had been detained for approximately four hours when they provided their phone passcodes and, at that time, Defendants had been separated from one another and individually interrogated. Id.
The Court found that, most importantly, each defendant was induced to provide their phone passcode with false information. Id. Specifically, Mr. Smith was told that he only needed to search the cell phone for “national security purposes and just to confirm that [he] was not a terrorist.” See Dkt. 133, Smith Decl. ¶ 24; see also id., Ex. 13 (transcript of video interrogation in which Smith asks “What does credit cards have to do with national security that Ramirez is talking about? What is it?”). Terabelian was told that agents needed to look at her phone to see if Terabelian was a national security threat, and that Terabelian would “be on the next flight” if she cooperated with agents. See Dkt. 133, Terabelian Decl. ¶ 12.
Under these circumstances, the Court found, the provision of passcodes by Defendants to customs agents was not voluntary, and any evidence discovered on Defendants’ smartphones at the Miami airport was ordered suppressed. Dkt. 296 at 18 (citing United States v. Thompson, 422 F.3d 1285, 1295–96 (11th Cir. 2005) (“Sufficiently coercive conduct normally involves . . . the making of a promise that induces a confession.”).
Yet while the Court granted Defendant’s Motion to suppress the physical fruits of the Miranda violation at the Miami airport, the Court rejected Mr. Smith’s argument that because the applications for warrants to search Defendants’ homes referenced the tainted evidence seized at the Miami airport, the evidence seized during the search of Defendants’ home was the fruit of the poisonous tree and should also be suppressed.
In his Motion to Suppress Evidence Seized at the Miami Airport on Fourth Amendment Grounds, Mr. Smith argued that the government’s entire case against him was the fruit of a “disturbing emerging practice of law enforcement agencies [directing] direct border officers to use their border search authority to investigate alleged criminal conduct untethered from any border or national security concern. The result is an “anything goes” free-for-all when hapless subjects of a domestic criminal investigation happen to travel through an airport and are denied fundamental rights.” Dkt. 130 at 1.
Mr. Smith argued that Ninth Circuit case law was controlling and that precedent in United States v. Cano, 934 F.3d 1002, 1017 (9th Cir. 2019) expressly forbade intrusive searches conducted for general law enforcement purposes, which are distinguishable from the “routine searches” to “to prevent smuggling and to prevent prohibited articles from entry, which are proper under the government’s plenary border search authority.  See U.S. Const. art. I, § 8, cl. 1.
The Court denied Defendants’ Motion to Suppress on Fourth Amendment grounds, chastising Mr. Smith for limiting its argument that the Miami airport search was not permissible under Eleventh Circuit to “a single footnote.” Dkt. 296 at 6. The Court countered that “[n]owhere in Touset did the Eleventh Circuit limit its holding to searches of electronic devices for child pornography.” Id. The Court then leaped to a second, crucial, conclusion based on its reading of the second portion of the Touset opinion, stating that in finding the record supported a finding of reasonable suspicion, the court in Touset “did not apply the standard Defendants suggest” and  “analyze whether agents had reasonable suspicion of contraband” but rather applied a “broader” standard enunciated by the Eleventh Circuit in Denson v. United States, 574 F.3d 1318, 1339 (11th Cir. 2009): that reasonable suspicion must be based upon a “particularized and objective basis for suspecting the particular person of criminal activity.” Dkt. 296 at 7 (adding emphasis).
The Court’s misreading of Eleventh Circuit case law for the proposition that CBP’s search and seizure authority extends warrantless border searches based on suspicion of general criminal activity was pivotal in this case. Critically, the Court’s interpretation of Eleventh Circuit case law allowed it to dismiss any notion that Ninth Circuit or (analogous jurisprudence) might apply, and thereby find that the forum agents’ reliance “on the law of the situs” was reasonable when directing the out-of-circuit search, Dkt. 296 at 12, and that “all agents involved fully complied with Eleventh Circuit law.” Id. at 12-13. This, in turn, caused the Court to find Mr. Smith’s arguments undermined by the Supreme Court’s discussion in Davis v. United States, 564 U.S. 229 (2011) regarding the circumstances warranting deterrence. See Davis, 564 U.S. at 241 (“An officer who conducts a search in reliance on binding appellate precedent does no more than ac[t] as a reasonable officer would and should act under the circumstances.”) Thus, concluded the Court, “Applying those principles to the unique circumstances before the Court, deterrence is not warranted merely because the Miami airport search violated Ninth Circuit law.” Dkt. 296 at 12.
The Court noted that under Davis, deterrence would only be warranted if forum agents from directing out-of-circuit searches that comply with the law of the situs of the search “exhibited deliberate, reckless, or grossly negligent disregard for Fourth Amendment rights.” Dkt. 296 at 13 (citing Davis, 564 U.S. at 238). The Court noted that nothing suggested Agent Palmerton “controlled the location of the border search.” Id. “In sum,” the Court concluded, “there is no ‘forum shopping’ to deter here because no forum shopping occurred.” Id. at 14. Persuaded that the government’s untested interpretation of Eleventh Circuit law controlled the case, the Court concluded that “Eleventh Circuit law requires the denial of Defendants’ motion to suppress” on Fourth Amendment grounds. Id.
Mr. Smith argued that Ninth Circuit precedent in United States v. Cano, 934 F.3d 1002, 1017 (9th Cir. 2019) expressly forbade intrusive searches conducted for general law enforcement purposes, which are distinguishable from the “routine searches” to “to prevent smuggling and to prevent prohibited articles from entry, which are proper under the government’s plenary border search authority.  See U.S. Const. art. I, § 8, cl. 1. Indeed, Mr. Smith argued, as set forth in Cano, “[w]arrants are generally required ‘unless the exigencies of the situation make the needs of law enforcement so compelling that the warrantless search is objectively reasonable under the Fourth Amendment.’” Cano, 934 F.3d at 1010 (quoting Mincey v. Arizona, 437 U.S. 385, 393-94 (1978). 
The Court agreed that the pretextual stop would have been unlawful if Ninth Circuit law applied: “Indeed, under Ninth Circuit law, the search at issue falls outside the scope of the border search exception. In the Ninth Circuit, ‘[a] border search must be conducted to enforce importation laws, and not for general law enforcement purposes.’ Dkt. 296 at 4 (quoting Cano, 934 F.3d at 1013). Therefore, under Cano and general Fourth Amendment jurisprudence, to determine whether a search was conducted for general law enforcement purposes, courts must conduct an objective inquiry. Dkt. 296 at 5 (citing Cano, 934 F.3d at 1016 n.9).
However, based on the Eleventh Circuit location of the search, Miami, FL, the Court found that Eleventh Circuit law applied, and the search was lawful, because in the Eleventh Circuit, “border searches of property are reasonable without any level of suspicion.” Dkt. 296 at 4 (quoting United States v. Touset, 890 F.3d 1227, 1232, 1237 (11th Cir. 2018)). United States v. Touset, 890 F.3d 1227 (11th Cir. 2018) involved the “importation of contraband” – specifically, child pornography on two laptops and two external hard drives in the traveler’s possession. Id. at 1230.
The Court in Touset held that border agents needed no justification whatsoever to detain (for seventeen days) and forensically search electronic devices of an American citizen returning from abroad. Id. at 1237. As stated in the concurring opinion, “This new-found government position presents a different and difficult question, one not addressed by the Supreme Court or (until today) any appellate court. Touset, 890 F.3d at 1238-39 (Corrigan, J., concurring in part). Justice Corrigan therefore concurred only in the Court’s alternative holding that “the district court correctly denied Touset’s motions to suppress because the forensic searches of his electronic devices were supported by reasonable suspicion.” Id.
Touset’s holding that border searches of property are reasonable without any level of suspicion is anchored in Congress’ broad powers under the Commerce Clause “to prevent smuggling and to prevent prohibited articles from entry.” Touset, 890 F.3d at 1229. “[B]ecause child pornography is unprotected by the First Amendment, the Court reasoned, “Congress may declare it contraband and prohibit its importation.” Id. at 1232 (citing United States v. Thirty-Seven Photographs, 402 U.S. 363, 376-77 (1971); accord United States v. 12 200-Ft. Reels of Super 8MM. Film, 413 U.S. 123, 128-29 (1973). Therefore, CBP’s 17-day detention and forensic search of the defendant’s two laptops and two external hard drives to prevent the “importation of contraband” – child pornography in the traveler’s possession –, the Court reasoned, did not require reasonable suspicion because such search and seizure was proper under the government’s plenary border search authority.
In his reply brief in Support of Motions To Suppress Evidence From Pretextual Detention and Warrantless Searches [Dkt. 208], Mr. Smith cited well-settled authorities and case law delimiting the nature of CBP’s police power. As Mr. Smith stated, “CBP has statutory authority to conduct border searches to ‘interdict[] persons attempting to illegally enter or exit the United States or goods being illegally imported into or exported from the United States at a place other than a designated port of entry” and to “deter and prevent the illegal entry of terrorists, terrorist weapons, persons, and contraband.’” Dkt. 208 at 8-9 (quoting 6 U.S.C. § 211(e)(3)(A)-(B)).
In its Opposition to Mr. Smith’s Motion [Dkt. 152], the government characterized items seized from the defendants’ phones, such as a photograph of a fake driver’s license, as “counterfeit access devices and identification documents,” which it argued were a “form of digital contraband,” subject to seizure like the pornographic images in Touset. Dkt. 152 at 9, 17. In his Reply, Mr. Smith made clear that no law declares third parties’ “access devices” to be contraband and prohibits their importation:
To the contrary, the definition of contraband that cannot be transported, concealed, or possessed on an aircraft includes drugs, weapons, counterfeit money, certain cigarettes, counterfeit versions of certain copyrighted materials, and goods bearing a counterfeit mark as defined under 18 U.S.C. § 2320. 49 U.S.C. § 80302(a)-(b); accord 19 U.S.C. § 4301 (adopting that definition and adding other goods whose importation is prohibited by the Tariff Act of 1930, i.e., the Act prohibiting importation of child pornography but not photographs of allegedly fake identification documents). Not one of the “AUTHORITY/REFERENCES” cited in the CBP memorandum provided by the government (Dkt. 152 Ex. 4 ¶ 4) references authority to interdict third parties’ access devices. Indeed, Counsel has been unable to find a single case, statute, or regulation that would take the step the government requests here and define CBP’s authority to search for “contraband” as including authority to search for third parties’ access devices. Dkt. 208 at 9-10.
Based on the foregoing, Mr. Smith argued that whether or not a reasonable search for contraband would have been permissible, this was neither a search for contraband nor a reasonable search and was “therefore unconstitutional under the Fourth Amendment regardless of which circuit’s law applied.” Dkt. 208 at 15-16 n.19. Mr. Smith distinguished Touset as a case permitting searching for actual digital contraband – child pornography – “rather than evidence of an intent-based crime.” Id. (citing Touset, 890 F.3d at 1236; see Cano, 934 at 1015 n.8 (distinguishing Touset on this ground)).
In denying Defendants’ Motion to Suppress on Fourth Amendment grounds, the Court chastised Mr. Smith for limiting its argument that the Miami airport search was not permissible under Eleventh Circuit to “a single footnote.” Dkt. 296 at 6. The Court countered that “[n]owhere in Touset did the Eleventh Circuit limit its holding to searches of electronic devices for child pornography.” Id. The Court then leaped to a second, crucial, conclusion based on its reading of the second portion of the Touset opinion, stating that in finding the record supported a finding of reasonable suspicion, the court in Touset “did not apply the standard Defendants suggest” and  “analyze whether agents had reasonable suspicion of contraband” but rather applied a “broader” standard enunciated by the Eleventh Circuit in Denson v. United States, 574 F.3d 1318, 1339 (11th Cir. 2009): that reasonable suspicion must be based upon a “particularized and objective basis for suspecting the particular person of criminal activity.” Dkt. 296 at 7 (adding emphasis).
In emphasizing and seizing on the phrase “criminal activity,” the Court completely lost sight of the contours of CBP’s statutory authority, which does not permit it to conduct warrantless border searches based on reasonable suspicion of general “criminal activity.” As Mr. Smith had taken pains to make clear in his Motion and Reply, a border search must be conducted to enforce importation laws, and not for general law enforcement purposes. See Dkt. 208 at 8-9 (quoting 6 U.S.C. § 211(e)(3)(A)-(B)) (CBP has statutory authority to conduct border searches to “interdict[] persons attempting to illegally enter or exit the United States or goods being illegally imported into or exported from the United States at a place other than a designated port of entry” and to “deter and prevent the illegal entry of terrorists, terrorist weapons, persons, and contraband.”).
Nothing in Touset or  Denson violate this bedrock principle because both cases and the progeny they rely on involve searches for importation of contraband – a circumstance not present in Mr. Smith’s case. Denson cannot stand for an expansion of the contours of CBP’s search and seizure authority to warrantless border searches based on suspicion of general criminal activity. Denson arose when the defendant claimed customs agents violated her rights under the U.S. Constitution and Florida tort law by searching her at the Miami airport after she arrived aboard a flight from Jamaica “on the purported suspicion that she was attempting to smuggle narcotics into the United States inside her alimentary canal.” Denson, 574 F.3d at 1323. As expressly stated in Denson, cases like Denson and Touset involve searches for the interception of contraband, not intrusive searches conducted for general law enforcement purposes:
Reasonable suspicion requires more than mere fanciful conjecture; it must be based upon a “particularized and objective basis for suspecting the particular person . . . of criminal activity.” United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 417-18, 101 S. Ct. 690, 695, 66 L. Ed. 2d 621 (1981). Although this standard imposes limits on a Customs official’s discretion after an individual has crossed the border, it relaxes the normal warrant requirement of probable cause in recognition of the “many difficulties that attend the attempt[s] to intercept contraband and to apprehend increasingly mobile and sophisticated smugglers.” United States v. Bilir, 592 F.2d 735, 739-40 (4th Cir. 1979) Denson, 574 F.3d at 1341 (emphasis added).
The Court’s misreading of Eleventh Circuit case law for the proposition that CBP’s search and seizure authority extends warrantless border searches based on suspicion of general criminal activity was pivotal in this case. Critically, the Court’s interpretation of Eleventh Circuit case law allowed it to dismiss any notion that Ninth Circuit or (analogous jurisprudence) might apply, and thereby find that the forum agents’ reliance “on the law of the situs” was reasonable when directing the out-of-circuit search, Dkt. 296 at 12, and that “all agents involved fully complied with Eleventh Circuit law.” Id. at 12-13. This, in turn, caused the Court to find Mr. Smith’s arguments undermined by the Supreme Court’s discussion in Davis v. United States, 564 U.S. 229 (2011) regarding the circumstances warranting deterrence. See Davis, 564 U.S. at 241 (“An officer who conducts a search in reliance on binding appellate precedent does no more than ac[t] as a reasonable officer would and should act under the circumstances.”) Thus, concluded the Court, “Applying those principles to the unique circumstances before the Court, deterrence is not warranted merely because the Miami airport search violated Ninth Circuit law.” Dkt. 296 at 12.
The Court noted that under Davis, deterrence would only be warranted if forum agents from directing out-of-circuit searches that comply with the law of the situs of the search “exhibited deliberate, reckless, or grossly negligent disregard for Fourth Amendment rights.” Dkt. 296 at 13 (citing Davis, 564 U.S. at 238). The Court noted that nothing suggested Agent Palmerton “controlled the location of the border search.” Id. “In sum,” the Court concluded, “there is no ‘forum shopping’ to deter here because no forum shopping occurred.” Id. at 14. Persuaded that the government’s untested interpretation of Eleventh Circuit law controlled the case, the Court concluded that “Eleventh Circuit law requires the denial of Defendants’ motion to suppress” on Fourth Amendment grounds. Id.
Yet The Court failed to consider CBP agents’ violation of their own regulations and policies, which apply regardless of the “situs of the search”
It is undisputed based on the above-described CBP and FBI conduct that deterrence and suppression of all unconstitutionally obtained evidence, including evidence that was utilized to obtain the search warrants, was warranted. It is true that to trigger the exclusionary rule, police conduct must be sufficiently deliberate that exclusion can meaningfully deter it. The police conduct here was sufficiently deliberate under any circuit law.” CBP agents deliberately fabricated a “national security concern” as a pretext for the search and the search was not for “importation of contraband,” but  for aiding the FBI in investigating the alleged PPP loan fraud. The Court limited its inquiry to whether forum agents directing out-of-circuit searches complied with “the law of the situs of the search.” As set forth above, they  did not. Yet the Court failed to consider CBP agents’ violation of their own regulations and policies, which apply regardless of the “situs of the search”
There exists a line of venerable Ninth Circuit case law holding that  egregious Fourth Amendment violations warrant the application of the exclusionary rule in civil proceedings, such as CBP border inspections. See Gonzalez-Rivera v. INS, 22 F.3d 1441, 1448 (9th Cir. 1994); Sanchez v. Sessions, 904 F.3d 643 (9th Cir. 2017) (evidence obtained in an unlawful manner will be excluded from civil proceedings (1) “when the agency violates a regulation promulgated for the benefit of petitioners and that violation prejudices the petitioner’s protected interests” and (2) “when the agency egregiously violates a petitioner’s Fourth Amendment rights.”) Part 162 of Chapter I of Title 19 of the Code of Federal Regulations Customs sets forth the rules which regulate U.S. Customs and Border Protection’s Inspection, Search, and Seizure powers. 19 C.F.R. § 162.21 of Subpart C, “Seizures,” provides that “Property may be seized, if available, by any Customs officer who has reasonable cause to believe that any law or regulation enforced by Customs and Border Protection or Immigration and Customs Enforcement has been violated, by reason of which the property has become subject to seizure or forfeiture.” 19 C.F.R. § 162.21 (Lexis Advance through the Nov. 30, 2022 issue of the Federal Register, with the exception of the amendments appearing at 87 FR 71748, 87 FR 73400, 87 FR 73433, and 87 FR 73488).
Here, Mr. Smith’s interest in being free from pretextual searches and seizures clearly fall within the purposes of 19 C.F.R. § 162.21. CBP admittedly did not have “reasonable cause” to believe that any law or regulation enforced by Customs and Border Protection or Immigration and Customs Enforcement had been violated. There was no “reasonable cause” to believe Mr. Smith was attempting to import contraband. CBP officers falsified their reports by stating that the search and detention occurred “for purposes of national security.” CBP conducted a series of searches of private smartphones over the course of almost four hours, lied about the purpose of their search, violated CBP policy by executing the search without the travelers present, and clearly violated 19 C.F.R. § 162.21. Bad faith constitutional violations are per se egregious. See Gonzalez-Rivera v. INS, 22 F.3d 1441, 1449 n.5 (9th Cir. 1994) (“Federal courts cannot countenance deliberate violations of basic constitutional rights. To do so would violate our judicial oath to uphold the Constitution of the United States.”); Adamson v. C.I.R., 745 F.2d 541, 546 (9th Cir. 1984). Because the pretext search and seizure by CBP agents was an egregious constitutional violation and per se violation of 19 C.F.R. § 162.21, the violation required suppression of the evidence obtained, regardless of whether the FBI agents directing the out-of-circuit search complied with Ninth Circuit, Eleventh Circuit, or any circuit case law.
	Thus, despite egregious violations of the Fourth Amendment and the agency’s own regulations, the Court found the government to be free of misconduct and therefore deterrence completely unwarranted. Yet Mr. Smith was severely prejudiced and irreparably harmed by the government’s conduct. As such, Mr. Smith’s sentence was imposed in violation of the Constitution or laws of the United States, and must be set aside.
